# R Contribution Working Group Meeting 2022-09-16

## Present

**R Core**: Michael Lawrence, Martyn Plummer   
**Bioconductor Core**:   
**R Foundation**: Heather Turner   
**R Consortium Diversity & Inclusion Group**:   
**MiR**:   
**R-Ladies**: Yani Bellini Saibene (rOpenSci & LatinR)  
**R User Groups**:   
**Forwards**: Ella Kaye   
**General R community**: Gabriel Becker, Lluís Revilla, Gergely Daroczi, Caio Lente, Angela Sanzo, John Hayes, Debartha Paul



## Agenda

1. Welcome
 - Round of introductions

2. Discussion and prioritisation of Ideas from Ideas Incubator (https://github.com/r-devel/rcontribution/blob/main/ideas_incubator.md)
 - Translation hackathon (https://github.com/r-devel/rcontribution/issues/36)
     - Possibly joint with Bioconductor translation events (2 hours on a Saturday ~ monthly).
         - Could tie in with BioCAsia conference (https://biocasia2022.bioconductor.org/) to focus on that region, coming up towards end of the year.
     - Possibly as satellite to LatinR (https://latin-r.com/) (10-14 October) focusing on Brazilian Portuguese and Spanish
         - Chairs happy to advertise, add to schedule. Can provide Zoom account if that is useful. Can organize on LatinR Slack to help with translation. YBS will create channel for this.
         - Saturday could work, but might have time in programme during Wed-Fri.
         - LatinR is free to attend, so anyone can register
 - Further Collaboration Campfires (https://github.com/r-devel/rcontribution/issues/32)
     - Potential structured topics:
         - Installing R from source. Could test new instructions in R Development Guide. 
         - Testing R before release.
         - Re-run previous topics for different time zones
     - Unstructured topics:
         - Labelling bugs to add to Bug BBQ repo
         - Triaging bugs
         - Adding translations
         - Office hour for new contributors, agenda determined by people that come
     - Catering for different time zones (Asia-Pacific, Africa-Middle_East-Europe, Americas)
         - Cycle between time zones every 3 months
         - Focus on different time zone in each quarter
         - Same day, different time zones
     - Two audiences: 1) people completely new to contributing that are curious and want to find out more; 2) people that have shown some interest (attended Campfires, useR! tutorial, Bug BBQ or joined Slack) but still don't know where to start/are not confident diving in. Office hours/unstructured events could help with second case and may be more sustainable to run regularly.
     - On office hours: need to be clear about messaging, not about help with R. Maybe try at 2 time zones for a few months and see how it goes. Advertising need to get in people's consciousness as a place to get support with contributing. Can use Twitter and Slack, but passes by in feed. Should also add to website and event calendar. Add link to event calendar to Twitter profile. Can email Campfire and useR! tutorial participants. Bug BBQ - can track who commented there (don't have record of registrations for this).
 - Follow-on from Bug BBQ (https://github.com/r-devel/rcontribution/issues/33)
     - Continue adding labelled bugs to Bug BBQ? Maybe as a Collaboration Campfire?
     - Hold a mini version on a regular basis? (This is similar to "screencast" idea for Biweekly Bug)
     - What came out of the Bug BBQ? We should do retrospective on this to see what happened on bugs that were looked at. Are there any bottlenecks with R Core that could be followed up, to ensure that they are not the limiting factor?
 - Biweekly Bug (https://github.com/r-devel/rcontribution/issues/37). 
     - Idea: feature an open bug on Slack/Twitter every other week, that is either suitable for newbies or where help is particularly wanted
     - Possible "screencast" format: one person takes the reigns and tries to fix with audience participation
     - Requires steady stream of tractable bugs, whereas ones that have sat around a while are usually harder. Maybe R Core/triagers need to defer some easy bugs for this purpose. GB and Sebastian Meyer went through bugs in advance of Bug BBQ to find ones more suited to newcomers. It wash ard to find ones to flag even for that.
 - Draft code of conduct for R Project (https://github.com/r-devel/rcontribution/issues/34)
     - Lluís Revilla willing to help, currently on Bioconductor CoC team
     - Need first version to cover any "live" Working Group events, such as the Office Hours. This can be adapted from the useR! or R Contributors Slack CoC, main requirement is for volunteers to be contact for any reports.
 - Encourage testing of R during next feature freeze (https://github.com/r-devel/rcontribution/issues/35)
     - Promote via Twitter/Slack
     - Have as topic for Collaboration Campfire
     - This can be pushed till later as there won't be a new version till next April/May.

3. AOB / Next steps
    - Next meeting: Tues Oct 18, 18:30 UTC.
