# R Contribution Working Group Meeting 2024-08-20

## Present

**R Core**:
**Bioconductor Core**:
**R Foundation**: Heather Turner
**MiR**:
**R-Ladies**:
**RainbowR**:
**Forwards**:
**Latin R**:
**Africa R**:
**Asia R**:
**R User Groups**:
**General R community**: Aidan Lakshman

## Agenda

- Welcome + start meeting recording.

### Main items

- Call to host useR! 2024

- Dev Days (https://github.com/r-devel/r-dev-day)
    - Dev Day @ Fred Hutch post posit::conf(2024)
        - This went well. It was a smaller group than at useR!, so did not make so much progress on bugs, but had a couple of patches submitted by the end of the day and several more works in progress
    - Dev Day @ RSECon24 and @ Shiny in Production Conf (UK)
    - LatinR 2024 (virtual)
        - HT asked organizers and they are okay with idea of having virtual R Dev Day as satellite event. HT will follow up with past participants of R Contributor events from Latin America that may want to help with organizing.

- R Dev Container (https://github.com/r-devel/r-dev-env)
    - Nearly at the end of Google Summer of Code 2024. Released one version in first half of project with extended documentation and better support for building multiple R versions. Currently working on next release which will support running on GitHub
    - Positron IDE has good support for debugging C functions called by R code. Unfortunately it's not currently possibly to use this with Codespaces/Gitpod. Maybe in future can run as local dev container.

- CRAN Cookbook (https://github.com/r-devel/cran-cookbook)
    - Making good progress on first version. The team will report back at the next R Repositories Working Group meeting (Monday 9 September 15:00 UTC)

- Translations
    - Gergely and Mike have been doing good work keeping the Weblate server running when issues have cropped up. We've had a few new joiners recently, probably some as result of talks/workshops at useR! and posit::conf.

- AOB
    - Tomek Gieorgijewski asked on Slack about Slack Pro. This is too expensive. Up till now it has been possible to get a data dump of entire history. But Slack are changing their policy [post edit: Content older than one year will be deleted starting August 26th, 2024]. In the past we have discussed trying Matrix. Setting this up could be a possible project for the hackathon at RSECon24.

### Next meeting

- Friday, September 20, 2024, 14:00-15:00 UTC
