# R Contribution Working Group Meeting 2025-06-17

## Present

**R Core**:Michael Lawrence  
**Bioconductor Core**:   
**R Foundation**:  Heather Turner  
**MiR**: gwynn gebeyhu   
**R-Ladies**: gwynn gebeyhu  
**Forwards**: gwynn gebeyhu  
**Latin R**:   
**Africa R**:   
**Asia R**:   
**R User Groups**:   
**General R community**: Gabe Becker   

## Agenda

- Welcome
    - gwynn is at the UN Open Source Week: https://www.un.org/digital-emerging-technologies/content/open-source-week-2025. 
Seems to be the only R person there! A lot of maintainers from other OS projects there. 
Worth promoting events like this in future (this event happens every year).

### Main items

- GSoC 2025
    - Plans for presentations at useR! 2025
        - No one else yet expressed in regular talk at in-person event, so Hanxia Li likely to take that on.
        - Only one mentee (Avinab Neogy) expressed interest in lightning talk at virtual event.
        - HT will chase mentors one more time before finalising.
        - GB will check with Hanxia and Michael Lawrence about who can present.
    
- Report back from R Dev Day @ Rencontres R 2025
    - Initial report https://github.com/r-devel/r-dev-day/blob/main/reports/2025-05-22_RencontresR2025.md (plan to follow up in a week or so, to add summary of progess).
        - 16 participants, including 3 remote
        - By the end of the day (or very soon after): ~4 patches submitted, ~4 works in progress, plus some discussions/bug reports 
    - At least a few patches accepted on issues Kurt Hornik had proposed for this event. He was able to join remotely so that worked quite well.
    - Also worked on a few issues HT had discussed with Martin Maechler during her visit to ETH Zurich back in February. 
Although Martin commented on the issues as they were updated by Dev Day participants, the groups seemed to diverge from Martin's original proposals, reducing likelihood of patches being accepted. 
Try get R Core members to join remotely when it is likely they will be reviewing the patch afterwards!

- News on upcoming R Dev Days 2025 (https://contributor.r-project.org/events/r-dev-days/) 
 
    |          Satellite to         |       Where      | Date |   Deadline  |
    |:-----------------------------:|:----------------:|:-------------:|:---------:|
    | [useR! 2025 (8-10 Aug)](https://user2025.r-project.org/additional/r-dev-day)         | Durham, NC, USA  | Mon 11 Aug    | Tue 15 Apr |
    | [RSECon25 (9-11 Sep)](https://warwick.ac.uk/fac/sci/statistics/news/r-dev-day-rsecon25) | Warwick, UK      | Fri 12 Sep    | Wed 23 Apr |
    | [Shiny in Production (8-9 Oct)](https://pretix.eu/r-contributors/r-dev-day-sip-2025/) | Newcastle, UK    | 7-8 Oct       | Wed 24 Sep |
     - Tentative plans for R Dev Day at Monash, Australia, some time 10-21 November and even more tentative in New Zealand (probably Auckland), some time 1-19 Dec.
     - useR! Dev Day: Experienced contributors/R Core members include Gergely Daróczi, Davis Vaughan, Lionel Henry, Jenny Bryan, Mike Chirico, Michael Lawrence. Martin Maechler will be present remotely. 
       This is in addition to organizing team: Gabe Becker, Shannon Pileggi and Colin Rundel in person; Ella Kaye and Heather Turner online.
         - HT will check if Simon Urbanek will be there
         - HT following up about catering
     - RSE Con25: GB will be visiting Warwick 26 August - 12 September so he can work with HT and Ella Kaye to prepare for the R Dev Day as well as work on contributions to R. 
   He is willing to give a Warwick RUG talk during his visit - will make hybrid as it is out of term time, so not many people about.

- Translations
    - Avinab Neogy volunteered to help Gergely Daróczi prepare a patch for submitting to R Core. This is still a work in progress. 
Ivan Krylov noted on the R Contributors Slack that he had seen some regressions in the Russian translations, which we should aim to avoid!

- News from office hours
    - Only HT and Ella Kaye at EMEA/APAC Office Hour this month, but then had 5 newcomers at the AMER Office Hour. Not sure how they heard about the office hours - too busy answering questions on contributing to R packages, 
developing R packages for CRAN and contributing to base R. At least one person followed up by joining the Forwards package development workshops, which are being held over June/July (https://forwards.github.io/package-dev/workshops.html).

- Report on C Study Group
    - Started with 3 cohorts in February, 1 never kicked off and 1 had a lot of drop out after the first session, so reduced to one cohort with several committed participants.
    - A new cohort started in May covering Oceania, led by Nick Tierney and this seems to have got off to a good start.

### Next meetings

- Friday, July 18, 2025, 14:00-15:00 UTC ([find your local time](https://arewemeetingyet.com/UTC/2025-07-18/14:00/R%20Contribution%20Working%20Group)).
