# R Contribution Working Group Meeting 2025-08-19

## Present

**R Core**:   
**Bioconductor Core**:   
**R Foundation**: Heather Turner
**MiR**:   
**R-Ladies**:   
**Forwards**:   
**Latin R**:   
**Africa R**:   
**Asia R**:   
**R User Groups**:   
**General R community**: Mikael Jagan, Gabe Becker  

## Agenda

- Welcome + start meeting recording.

### Main items


- R Dev Days 2025 (https://contributor.r-project.org/events/r-dev-days/) 
    - useR! Dev Day report back
        - Feedback from participants. Some issues:
            - Unsure what to put on GitHub vs Bugzilla. We could add a slide to kick-off slides to explain this. All preliminary discussion on GitHub. 1 comment on Bugzilla summarizing work on the R Dev Day issue (attach patch or tests as files). 
            - Needs some means for online facilitators to interact with in-person groups, e.g. one latop at venue always connect. Get groups to connect online if they don't have facilitator in their group.
            - Make sure facilitators are known: pictures and names on slides. 
            - Allocate facilitator for each group. Encourage to go to them with any questions. Check in facilitator after lunch.
            - Maybe add room for each group, if there are multiple spaces
            - Was one issue that two teams worked on. Get people to cross off issues they're not currently working on? Or put in different colour? Or easier for one facilitator in person and one online to be the director.
        - Review of current status of bugs

    - Dev Days with applications closed/open
 
        |          Satellite to         |       Where      | Date |   Deadline  |
        |:-----------------------------:|:----------------:|:-------------:|:---------:|
        | [RSECon25 (9-11 Sep)](https://warwick.ac.uk/fac/sci/statistics/news/r-dev-day-rsecon25) | Warwick, UK      | Fri 12 Sep    | Wed 23 Apr |
        | [Shiny in Production (8-9 Oct)](https://pretix.eu/r-contributors/r-dev-day-sip-2025/) | Newcastle, UK    | 7-8 Oct       | Wed 24 Sep |
     
     - Dev Days not yet open for registration

        | Where                | Date     |   Deadline  |
        |:--------------------:|:--------:|:-----------:|
        | Melbourne, Australia | Fri 21 Nov   | TBC |
        | Auckland, New Zealand | Tue 16 - Wed 17 Dec | TBC |
        

- Birdaro training for open source leaders (https://www.birdaro.org/2025/07/01/the-birdaro-training-program/)
    - Our application was accepted: Heather Turner, Gabe Becker, Michael Lawrence.
    - Copy of application: https://docs.google.com/document/d/143IHRBB66F_qegG92BnexwUe-rH3Ys_FI05AjX6wvoE/edit?usp=sharing. Needed to specify current goals, which we put down as:
        - Identify ways to increase the income of the R Foundation.
        - Build collaboration with potential future members of the R Core Team.
        - Pilot ways to involve the wider community in the process of R development (via a request for comments type process).

### Next meetings

- Friday, September 19, 2025, 14:00-15:00 UTC ([find your local time](https://arewemeetingyet.com/UTC/2025-09-19/14:00/R%20Contribution%20Working%20Group))
