# R Contribution Working Group Meeting 2025-01-24

## Present

**R Core**:    
**Bioconductor Core**:   
**R Foundation**: Heather Turner   
**MiR**:   
**R-Ladies**:   
**RainbowR**:   
**Forwards**:   
**Latin R**:   
**Africa R**:   
**Asia R**:   
**R User Groups**:   
**General R community**: Ben Hoffman

## Agenda

- Welcome (did not record the meeting as only two of us present, so more informal).

### Main items

- Plans for R Dev Days 2025 (https://contributor.r-project.org/events/r-dev-days/) 
 
    |          Satellite to         |       Where      | Proposed date |   Status  |
    |:-----------------------------:|:----------------:|:-------------:|:---------:|
    | [Rencontres R 2025 (19-21 May)](https://pretix.eu/r-contributors/r-dev-day-rr2025/)  | Mons, Belgium    | Thurs 22 May  | Confirmed |
    | useR! 2025 (8-10 Aug)         | Durham, NC, USA  | Mon 11 Aug    | Tentative |
    | RSECon25 (9-11 Sep)           | Warwick, UK      | Fri 12 Sep    | Tentative |
    | posit::conf (16-18 Sep)       | Atlanta, GA, USA | Thu 19 Sep    | Tentative |
    | [Shiny in Production (8-9 Oct)](https://pretix.eu/r-contributors/r-dev-day-sip-2025/) | Newcastle, UK    | 7-8 Oct       | Confirmed |
    
    - For the middle three events, the conference dates and venues are fixed, so we expect an R Dev Day to take place. We have contact with the conference organizers, but nothing more specific yet. 
Any offers to help with the organization (e.g., organizing the venue, promoting the event, preparing tasks, etc) most welcome!
    - Note that people will be able to register for the R Dev Day separately - they do not need to register for the main conference.
    - Ben may be able to help with the event in Atlanta - Heather will put him in touch will Ella Kaye who is taking the lead on that event.

- Translations
    - No updates here, can follow up on Slack.

- Plans for GSoC 2025
    - An application has been submitted for the R Project (or will be soon!)
    - Mentors to post projects here: https://github.com/rstats-gsoc/gsoc2025/wiki/table-of-proposed-coding-projects (most projects are related to a package that a mentor maintains).
    - Previous projects related to R Contribution:
        - R Dev Container: https://github.com/r-devel/r-dev-env. We can possibly make a project from the open issues, need to consider further.
        - R Translations dashboard: https://github.com/r-devel/translations-dashboard. Plenty to do here either as GSoC project, or for people to pick up. 
          Ben will dig into the open issues - he can't commit to mentoring a GSoC project, but has some time available to contribute in the coming weeks.

- R Contributor Office Hours: https://contributor.r-project.org/events/office-hours
    - See event calendar: https://contributor.r-project.org/events/
    - Good time to drop in and discuss on-going work or to co-work with other people (e.g. Cam Race is aiming to work on R Contributor stuff on the same day as the Office Hours, last month he was working on GitHub Actions for the translations dashboard).
        - February Office Hours are likely to change from February 13 to February 6 as Martin Maechler (R Core Developer) may be able to join us then.

### Next meetings

- Tuesday, February 18, 2025, 19:30-20:30 UTC
- Friday,  Mar 21, 2025, 14:00-15:00 UTC (clocks not yet changed in US, so +1hr on usual time, e.g. 8am Pacific, 11am Eastern).

