# R Contribution Working Group Meeting 2025-05-16

## Present

**R Core**:Michael Lawrence  
**Bioconductor Core**:   
**R Foundation**: Heather Turner  
**MiR**: gwynn gebeyehu   
**R-Ladies**: gwynn gebeyehu   
**Forwards**: gwynn gebeyehu  
**Latin R**:   
**Africa R**:   
**Asia R**:   
**R User Groups**:   
**General R community**: Avinab Neogy (GSoC), Hanxia Li (GSoC), Gabe Becker

## Agenda

- Welcome.

### Main items
    
- Plans for R Dev Days 2025 (https://contributor.r-project.org/events/r-dev-days/) 
 
    |          Satellite to         |       Where      | Date |   Deadline  |
    |:-----------------------------:|:----------------:|:-------------:|:---------:|
    | [Rencontres R 2025 (19-21 May)](https://pretix.eu/r-contributors/r-dev-day-rr2025/) | Mons, Belgium    | Thu 22 May  | Fri 18 Apr |
    | [useR! 2025 (8-10 Aug)](https://user2025.r-project.org/additional/r-dev-day)         | Durham, NC, USA  | Mon 11 Aug    | Tue 15 Apr |
    | [RSECon25 (9-11 Sep)](https://warwick.ac.uk/fac/sci/statistics/news/r-dev-day-rsecon25) | Warwick, UK      | Fri 12 Sep    | Wed 23 Apr |
    | [Shiny in Production (8-9 Oct)](https://pretix.eu/r-contributors/r-dev-day-sip-2025/) | Newcastle, UK    | 7-8 Oct       | Wed 24 Sep |
     - ~25 expected at R Dev Days in Mons, Belgium and Duke University; ~30 expected at Warwick
     - No longer planning R Dev Day after posit::conf (tidyverse Dev Day still in planning for Friday 19 September, probably at Georgia State University, which is in downtown Atlanta.)
     - Tentative plans for R Dev Day at Monash, Australia, some time 10-21 November and even more tentative in New Zealand (probably Auckland), some time 1-19 Dec.

- GSoC 2025
    - Links:
        - Wiki for R projects: https://github.com/rstats-gsoc/gsoc2025/wiki
        - GSoC website: https://summerofcode.withgoogle.com
        - FAQ, menotr/contributor guides etc: https://developers.google.com/open-source/gsoc/faq
    - Accepted R projects: https://summerofcode.withgoogle.com/programs/2025/organizations/r-project-for-statistical-computing
        - ReÔ¨Åning the R Dev Container for Debugging and Local Use (Avinab Neogy, mentors Heather Turner, Iain Emsley and Arthava Shirdhankar)
        - ChatR: A Local, Inclusive, and Accurate R Expert Chatbot for the R Ecosystem  (Hanxia Li, mentors Michael Lawrence and Gabe Becker)
            - Several people interested to hear about progress and potentially engage with the project.
        - Would be great to invite all GSoC mentors and mentees together at future RCWG meeting
        - Could also have lightning talk/posters at useR! 2025 (https://user2025.r-project.org/) - virtual event 1 August, in-person 8-10 2025. Talk where everyone presents a slide, or people contribute posters and those present (e.g. Gabe, Michael) can represent that block of posters.
    - Could invite mentors/mentees to Slack

- Other Projects
    - Two projects submitted to R Consortium Infrastructure Steering Committee related to R contribution/R core unfortunately did not get funded:
        - R wiki: based on [idea from GSoD 2024](https://github.com/rstats-gsod/gsod2024/wiki/Create-an-R-wiki) - Jasmine Daly and gwynn gebeyhu plan to respond to reviewer comments and resubmit in next round.
        - Development/management of a common translations glossary: https://saranjeetkaur.github.io/isc_proposal_translations/. Saranjeet Kaur Bhogal (propser) has teamed up with Jyoti Satnam Singh Bhogal, Anelda van der Walt and Aleksandra Pawlik to develop this in their own time, in part as learning opportunity. All will be attending R Dev Day @ RSECon25.

- Translations
    - Gergely fixed merge conflict, so translations can be made again.
    - Looking for helpers to manage admin tasks, e.g. preparing to patches for R Core.
        - Avinab Neogy is interested in helping with Weblate, e.g. creating a patch.
    - Ask Gergely if there is any tooling that could help around this? Could be proposed as task for R Dev Day at useR! 2025. Creating a patch could be a task in itself, might be good to do it when others are around.
    - Is there a role between contributor and full admin, that someone /some people could take on?

### Next meetings

- Tuesday, June 17, 2025, 18:30-19:30 UTC
