# R Contribution Working Group Meeting 2025-12-18

## Present

**R Core**: Michael Lawrence  
**Bioconductor Core**:   
**R Foundation**: Heather Turner  
**R-Ladies**:   
**Forwards**:   
**Latin R**:   
**Africa R**:   
**Asia R**:   
**R User Groups**:   
**General R community**: Mikael Jagan  

## Agenda

- Welcome

### Main items

- Birdaro training for open source leaders (https://www.birdaro.org/2025/07/01/the-birdaro-training-program/)
    - Community Playbook module
        - Short presentation slides: https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1mmPLpwTOT_8GqtG1kjbez0bsBK_qEXDz4xug1WoPiWY/edit?slide=id.g3a73dc6194b_0_39#slide=id.g3a73dc6194b_0_39
        - Draft playbook: https://github.com/gmbecker/R_contributor_pathway_pbk/blob/main/the_contributor_pathway.md (private repo at the moment, ask Gabe if he want to make it public)
            - Maybe get people to read before next RCWG meeting
            - Ask Gabe to present this to everyone then

- R Dev Days (https://contributor.r-project.org/events/r-dev-days/) 
    - Reports from recent events
        - R Dev Day @ Australia + Remote, Nov 21
        - R Dev Day @ New Zealand + Remote, Dec 16+17
    - Dates for 2026 (mostly tentative):
        - R Dev Day @ Rencontres R 2026, Nantes + Remote, Jun 19: https://pretix.eu/r-contributors/r-dev-day-rr2026/
        - R Dev Day @ CascadiaR, Portland, USA, Thu 18 or Fri 19 June, TBC (cascadiarcon@gmail.com)
        - R Dev Day @ useR! 2026, Warsaw, Poland, 10 July, TBC
        - R Project Sprint 2026, Birmingham, UK, Wed 2 - Fri 4 September (R Core meeting Tue 1 September), Birmingham, TBC

- Research Software Maintenance Fund update
    - Blog Post: https://blog.r-project.org/2025/12/17/rsmf-enabling-the-next-generation-of-contributors-to-r/index.html
        - Cross-posted with R Consortium: https://r-consortium.org/posts/650K-for-R/
    - Official start 1 March
    - RSMF round table in Jan/Feb, identify some dates after New Year
    - Move mentee projects to GitHub issues, assign people, think about how to prioritise
    - Build of R Bugs spreadsheet to organise triage (needs some automation)

- AOB
    - Bioconductor has hired someone working with contributors, based at Limerick. We should look to collaborate!
    - Bioconductor is using genAI to improve documentation, forming working group around that. This might generalise to R more broadly.
    - Can we create a prompt/context to assist someone contributing to R? A lot of people doing interesting work in this area (e.g. R in AI conference).
    - Sharing info on working groups: maybe R wiki could help with this?
    - R Foundation and R Consortium boards aim to to have another joint meeting around February time (2026), as they did for the first time earlier this year.

### Next meeting

 - Friday, January 23, 2026, 15:00-16:00 UTC ([find your local time](https://arewemeetingyet.com/UTC/2026-01-23/15:00/R%20Contribution%20Working%20Group)).
