# R Contribution Working Group Meeting 2025-06-17

## Present

**R Core**: Martin Maechler  
**Bioconductor Core**:   
**R Foundation**:  Heather Turner
**MiR**:   
**R-Ladies**:   
**Forwards**:   
**Latin R**:   
**Africa R**:   
**Asia R**:   
**R User Groups**:   
**General R community**: Llu√≠s Revilla 

## Agenda

- Welcome

### Main items

- News on upcoming R Dev Days 2025 (https://contributor.r-project.org/events/r-dev-days/) 
 
    |          Satellite to         |       Where      | Date |   Deadline  |
    |:-----------------------------:|:----------------:|:-------------:|:---------:|
    | [useR! 2025 (8-10 Aug)](https://user2025.r-project.org/additional/r-dev-day)         | Durham, NC, USA  | Mon 11 Aug    | Tue 15 Apr |
    | [RSECon25 (9-11 Sep)](https://warwick.ac.uk/fac/sci/statistics/news/r-dev-day-rsecon25) | Warwick, UK      | Fri 12 Sep    | Wed 23 Apr |
    | [Shiny in Production (8-9 Oct)](https://pretix.eu/r-contributors/r-dev-day-sip-2025/) | Newcastle, UK    | 7-8 Oct       | Wed 24 Sep |
     
     - useR! Dev Day update
         - Simon Urbanek can't stay on for this, but has  extra time on Saturday and Sunday the week before at the JSM in case anyone is there and wants to meet up.
         - Martin Maechler will be in Mountain Time (2 hours difference). Need to set up space for online meeting. HT can set up Zoom as host and then share co-host with others so that people can create breakout rooms. Share with local organisers (Shannon, Gabe, Colin), and R-Core (also Ella!).
         - Have 30 registered participants, 3 remote.
         - useR! can cover catering from the conference budget - people will get a card they can take to the canteen.
         - Starting to collect tasks/bugs for people to work on.
     - New standalone events

        | Where                | Date     |   Deadline  |
        |:--------------------:|:--------:|:-----------:|
        | Melbourne, Australia | Fri 21 Nov   | TBC |
        | Auckland, New Zealand | Tue 16 - Wed 17 Dec | TBC |
        
        - Some opportunity for remote participation
     
     - RSE Con25 update
         - About 30 participants coming in person.
         
     - Might open up SIP 2025 R Dev Day for remote participation focusing on Africa.
    
- Birdaro training for open source leaders (https://www.birdaro.org/2025/07/01/the-birdaro-training-program/)
    - HT is working on an application on behalf of the R Project. Need 3 people to participate, ideally would include 1 person from R Core - HT has reached out to R Core, R Foundation and some experienced contributors. Lluis would be interested if there is space.

- Translations
    - Patch still not made it to R Core yet.
    - Perhaps something to work on at R Dev Day @ useR! 2025? Gergely Daroczi and Mike Chirico will be there. Mike has already suggested this on Slack! HT can ask them to add issues to r-dev-day repo.
    - Main point is to get patch in for .0 release (in April).
        - Perhaps we need to have a translation freeze tying in with the feature freeze of R.
        - Or also have a trunk and devel branch?
        - Or have one person per language that submits patch for their language? Distributes work but harder to co-ordinate.
    - Is there a way that the patch can be prepared outside of Weblate (without admin access to server etc). Perhaps using scripts etc that any translator could contribute too.
    - Current status: seem to be trying to fix a bug where some translations are being reverted. Issue with merging patches that are made directly to R Core with ones contributed via Weblate.

### Next meetings

- Tuesday, August 19, 2025, 18:30-19:30 UTC ([find your local time](https://arewemeetingyet.com/UTC/2025-08-19/18:30/R%20Contribution%20Working%20Group)).
