# R Contribution Working Group Meeting 2025-04-15

## Present

**R Core**:  
**Bioconductor Core**:   
**R Foundation**: Heather Turner  
**MiR**:   
**R-Ladies**:   
**Forwards**:   
**Latin R**:   
**Africa R**:   
**Asia R**:   
**R User Groups**:   
**General R community**: Llu√≠s Revilla, Gabe Becker, Gergely Daroczi  

## Agenda

- Welcome.

### Main items
    
- Plans for R Dev Days 2025 (https://contributor.r-project.org/events/r-dev-days/) 
 
    |          Satellite to         |       Where      | Date |   Deadline  |
    |:-----------------------------:|:----------------:|:-------------:|:---------:|
    | [Rencontres R 2025 (19-21 May)](https://pretix.eu/r-contributors/r-dev-day-rr2025/) | Mons, Belgium    | Thu 22 May  | Fri 18 Apr |
    | [useR! 2025 (8-10 Aug)](https://user2025.r-project.org/additional/r-dev-day)         | Durham, NC, USA  | Mon 11 Aug    | Tue 15 Apr |
    | [RSECon25 (9-11 Sep)](https://warwick.ac.uk/fac/sci/statistics/news/r-dev-day-rsecon25) | Warwick, UK      | Fri 12 Sep    | Wed 23 Apr |
    | _posit::conf (16-18 Sep)_       | _Atlanta, GA, USA_ | _Fri 19 Sep_    | _TBA_ |
    | [Shiny in Production (8-9 Oct)](https://pretix.eu/r-contributors/r-dev-day-sip-2025/) | Newcastle, UK    | 7-8 Oct       | Wed 24 Sep |
     - ~25 applications for useR! Dev Day
         - HT to share appliation data with committee for review


- GSoC 2025
    - Timeline and process: https://github.com/rstats-gsoc/gsoc2025/wiki
        - Proposal rankings due 29 Apr (mentors will need to review earlier!)
    - Projects related to R contribution/R core
        - R Dev Container: https://github.com/rstats-gsoc/gsoc2025/wiki/Refining-the-R-Dev-Container
        - R Chatbot: https://github.com/rstats-gsoc/gsoc2025/wiki/ChatR:-R-Expert-Chatbot

- R Consortium Infrastructure Projects
    - Two projects submitted related to R contribution/R core
        - R wiki: based on [idea from GSoD 2024](https://github.com/rstats-gsod/gsod2024/wiki/Create-an-R-wiki) 
        - Development/management of a common translations glossary: https://saranjeetkaur.github.io/isc_proposal_translations/
    - Expect to hear May 1

- Translations
    - Currently have git conflict that is blocking translations, is on Gergely's to do list to fix!
    - A Glossary terminology managers group has been set up in Weblate, currently Saranjeet Kaur, Heather Turner, Michael Chirico (he/him)
    - Missed translation update for Q1 2025
        - Yes, would welcome extra helpers! Make a call on Slack.

### Next meetings

- Friday, May 16, 2025, 14:00-15:00 UTC 
