# R Contribution Working Group Meeting 2025-03-21

## Present

**R Core**:Michael Lawrence    
**Bioconductor Core**:   
**R Foundation**: Heather Turner  
**MiR**:    gwynn gebeyehu  
**R-Ladies**:    gwynn gebeyehu  
**RainbowR**:   
**Forwards**:   gwynn gebeyehu  
**Latin R**:   
**Africa R**:    gwynn gebeyehu  
**Asia R**:   
**R User Groups**:   
**General R community**: Gergely Daroczi, Gabe Becker, Llu√≠s Revilla, Avinab Neogy   

## Agenda

- Welcome.
- Meeting invite
    - Attendance at recent meetings has been low and previous participants have reported missing the calendar invites sent to the R-Contribution-WG@r-project.org mailman list. This month Heather tried a new process of obtaining the current list of (active) subscribers to the mailing list and adding them directly to the invite. People can still subscribe/unsubscribe via the mailing list, so at least semi-automated.
    - There are some discussions of moving current mailing lists from ETH (where Martin Maechler is based, but now retired) to another platform, maybe invitations will work with this!

### Main items
    
- Plans for R Dev Days 2025 (https://contributor.r-project.org/events/r-dev-days/) 
 
    |          Satellite to         |       Where      | Proposed date |   Status  |
    |:-----------------------------:|:----------------:|:-------------:|:---------:|
    | [Rencontres R 2025 (19-21 May)](https://pretix.eu/r-contributors/r-dev-day-rr2025/)  | Mons, Belgium    | Thurs 22 May  | Confirmed |
    | [useR! 2025 (8-10 Aug)](https://user2025.r-project.org/additional/r-dev-day)        | Durham, NC, USA  | Mon 11 Aug    | Confirmed |
    | RSECon25 (9-11 Sep)           | Warwick, UK      | Fri 12 Sep    | Confirmed |
    | posit::conf (16-18 Sep)       | Atlanta, GA, USA | Thu 19 Sep    | Planning |
    | [Shiny in Production (8-9 Oct)](https://pretix.eu/r-contributors/r-dev-day-sip-2025/) | Newcastle, UK    | 7-8 Oct       | Confirmed |
    - Recontres R ~25 people signed up. 
    - org committee for useR! Dev Day decided to have application process for this event. Martin Maechler will join remotely (at least for morning local time). Michael Lawrence will be there in person, probably Simon Urbanek too.
    - RSECon - waiting about reg
    - posit::conf definitely aiming for day after posit::conf


- Plans for GSoC 2025 (contributor deadline 8 Apr)
    - Timeline and process: https://github.com/rstats-gsoc/gsoc2025/wiki
    - R Dev Container: https://github.com/rstats-gsoc/gsoc2025/wiki/Refining-the-R-Dev-Container
    - Other potential projects (though getting late to propose now!)
        - R Translations dashboard: https://github.com/r-devel/translations-dashboard. Plenty to do here either as GSoC issue, or for people to pick up.
        - ML: would be used to have chatbot that's trained on information on CRAN, so can ask questions and it would give good answers based on man pages (could use Rd).
            - Michael and Gabe can mentor!
            - could make similar related to R contribution e.g. based on R Dev Guide and other material. 
            - LR: CRAN is waiting on updates from Bioconductor (fixing some issues with links) that will allow all help pages to be online as HTML.

- Plans for ~~GSoD 2025~~ R Consortium Infrastructure Projects (deadline April 1)
    - Previous ideas for GSoD 2025 
        - Dates for GSoD reported last month were for 2024 - GSoD is not running in 2025!
        - Working on putting in a proposal to the R Consortium to work on [R wiki](https://github.com/rstats-gsod/gsod2024/wiki/Create-an-R-wiki) idea, with support from Kurt Hornik.
        - Important to have good templates for content that people can fill in to have consistent structure.
        - Have a clear scope of what content can be added to the wiki. Don't want scope creep! 
    - Saranjeet is working on a proposal for a package to maintain a glossary for use across R translation projects. So glossary and translations we have on Weblate may be synced with glossary and translations from other projects, e.g. rOpensci projects using GitHub workflow, possibly Bioconductor projects using Crowdin. https://saranjeetkaur.github.io/isc_proposal_translations/

- Maintaining translations glossary

- AOB


### Next meetings

- Tuesday,  Apr 15, 2025, 18:30-19:30 UTC
