# R Contribution Working Group Meeting 2026-02-17

## Present

**R Core**:  Michael Lawrence, Peter Dalgaard  
**R Foundation**: Heather Turner, Hadley Wickham  
**R Consortium**:  
**Forwards**:     
**R-Ladies**:     
**General R community**: Gabe Becker, Kylie Bemis, Mikael Jagan

Minutes of previous meetings: https://github.com/r-devel/rcwg/tree/main/team_minutes

## Agenda

- Welcome

### Main items

- Community Playbook/R Core Contributor pathway/R Core governance proposal

    * GH repo: https://github.com/gmbecker/R_contributor_pathway_pbk/blob/main/the_contributor_pathway.md (private repo, ask Gabe Becker for access). 

    * Google Doc: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1kBWwkXCQTR53xKI1ztF2gnNhI2ONX5cjL55f-Iwv6pU/edit?usp=sharing (private doc, request access)

    * How do we drive this forward?

    * HW: Suggest condense down to 5 pages. Willing to re-write if not stepping on people's toes.

    * ML: Current doc is full length of all ideas. Want to get out to Robert for sense check on whole thing. Then think how to present to different stakeholders

    * GB: Will send email and request meeting, happy to have other people there. Let GB know if you want to be cc'd in (HW, MJ)


- Google Summer of Code (https://github.com/rstats-gsoc/gsoc2026/wiki). 

    - Timeline:

        - Orgs announced Feb 19

        - Contributor deadline Mar 31 - should allow contributors at least 2 weeks to attempt tests and prepare proposal.

    - Do we have an project ideas for this? Most projects relate to R packages, but we have had some past projects related to R Contribution/R Foundation (e.g. R Journal).

        - Table of projects: https://github.com/rstats-gsoc/gsoc2026/wiki/table-of-proposed-coding-projects

        - ML: Could extend last year's project on AI assistant for R.Can we create an AI prompt/context to assist someone contributing to R? Based on R Development Guide.

        - HT: Maybe something related to multilingual documentation project? Seems to have stalled somewhat.

          - Check status with Elio

        - GB: Documenting and writing example implementations using ALTREP. GB willing to mentor. KB willing to co-mentor.

        - Any missing infrastructure to support contributor pathway.

            - Dashboard of contributions

       - Discuss on #gsoc channel of R Contributors Slack

       - Check with Gergely et al to see if there is anything under translation/Weblate work. E.g. output from Weblate going in to R SVN. 


- GitHub migration?
    - Posit willing to help moving to a more modern development platform
    - Governance framework may help with making such a decision. Come back to this after we've made more progress on governance
    - More interest from R Core to move to something hosted
    - Possible to have something to sit on top of SVN that would allow code review, CI/CD?
        - Ruby had mirror during transition that got synced back to Subversion tree. This could be something we could build on as we have mirror on GitHub already.
    - R Triage and Patch (RTAP) team could use GitHub mirror to review contributions.

        - GB: Question about this would be how to handle/migrate existing bugs, or whether just not to do that


### Updates

- Research Software Maintenance Fund

    - Soft Launch held on 9 February, minutes: https://github.com/r-devel/rsmf/blob/main/minutes/2026-02-09.md

    - Initial prep before official start date on 1 March.


- R Dev Days (https://contributor.r-project.org/events/r-dev-days/) 
    - Dates for 2026:
        - R Dev Day @ Rencontres R 2026, Nantes + Remote, Jun 19: https://pretix.eu/r-contributors/r-dev-day-rr2026/
        - US R Dev Day
            - Friday 26 (tutorial day) at CascadiaR: https://pretix.eu/r-contributors/r-dev-day-cascadiar-2026/
                - morning and afternoon refreshments provided (not lunch)
                - discounted conf hotel at Portland State
        - R Dev Day @ useR! 2026, Warsaw, Poland, 10 July, TBC
            - Contacted organizers. Initial response positive, looking into room bookings.
        - R Project Sprint 2026, Birmingham, UK, Wed 2 - Fri 4 September (R Core meeting Tue 1 September), Birmingham, TBC

### Next meeting

    - TBD
