# Welcome to the R Contributor Office Hour (EMEA/APAC)!

## Useful links

R Development Guide: https://contributor.r-project.org/rdevguide/  
R's Bugzilla: https://bugs.r-project.org  
R Project Weblate server: https://translate.rx.studio/projects/r-project  
R sources 
  - SVN repo: https://svn.r-project.org/R/trunk/
  - GitHub mirror: https://github.com/r-devel/r-svn/
   
R-devel mailing list archives: https://stat.ethz.ch/pipermail/r-devel/, searchable GitHub repo: https://github.com/MichaelChirico/r-mailing-list-archive/tree/master/r-devel   

Minutes from previous office hours: https://github.com/r-devel/rcontribution/tree/main/office_hours

## Warm up

Please tell us a bit about yourself, following the template below:

Name: Heather Turner   
Country I am currently in: UK  
I'm interested in contributing to: R bugs, translations (English)  
Something we could do or discuss together today: 
    
Name: Ella Kaye  
Country I am currently in: UK  
I'm interested in contributing to: R bugs, translations (English)  
Something we could do or discuss together today: handling of `...`: https://fosstodon.org/@nibsalot/110105034507818285   

Name: Saranjeet Kaur  
Country I am currently in: India  
I'm interested in: translations (Hindi), Upkeep of the R dev guide  
Something we could do or discuss together today: Agree on a format for translations - make a note on the R dev guide, a conventions list
   
Name: Nic Crane  
Country I am currently in:  UK  
I'm interested in contributing to: R  bugs, other things (not sure yet!)  
Something we could do or discuss together today: Nothing specific for me, just coming to lurk and start working out where I can get started : )  
    
Name: Ivan Krylov  
Country I am currently in: Russia  
I'm interested in: R bugs  
Something we could do or discuss together today: nothing in particular
    
Name: Ayush Patel  
Country I am currently in: India  
I'm interested in contributing to: Documentation (Assuming it to be a relatively comfortable place to begin), then may be slowly move towards bugs. I can help with translation in Hindi, Gujarati and Marathi -- however, not sure hohw translations on technical topics/subjects work.  
Something we could do or discuss together today:  How to begin towards contibuting to R.

Name: Hugo Gruson  
Country I am currently in: Germany  
I'm interested in contributing to: R bugs, translations (French)  
Something we could do or discuss together today: Same as others, I'm just trying to learn how this group works and what is the most useful way to try and contribute to R as a newcomer.
    
Name: Nozim Ortikov  
Country I am currently in: Uzbekistan   
I'm interested in contributing to: R translations, bugs and just want to dive deep into R (Russian, Uzbek)  
Something we could do or discuss together today: This is my first time to particapte in office hour

Name: Binod J. Bogati  
Country I am currently in: Nepal  
I'm interested in contributing to: R guide for translations, translations (Nepali)  
Something we could do or discuss together today: Nothing particular for today

## Discussion

### Translations
 - Saranjeet wanted to know how to handle translating strings such as "Keyboard: PgUp, PgDown, Ctrl+Arrows, Ctrl+Home, Ctrl+End"
     - She has currently translated to Hindi as "कीबोर्ड: पेज अप, पेज डाउन, कंट्रोल+एरोज , कंट्रोल+होम , कंट्रोल+एन्ड ,", which is in Hindi script but is spoken the same as the English words, since these are imported/foreign words.
     - We looked at how other languages translate this string using the "Other languages" button on Weblate: https://translate.rx.studio/translate/r-project/base-r-gui/hi/?checksum=05ce1e10588b237c&sort_by=-priority,position#translations
         - French translates all the keys apart from those that are in English on a French keyboard: "Clavier : PageHaut, PageBas, Ctrl+Flèches, Ctrl+Début, Ctrl+Fin," According to Hugo: "keys that are translated in a French keyboard: del, end, screenshot, insert. I believe that other keys usually don't include text but use symbols (arrows, shift, pgup, pgdown). Ctrl and Alt are not translated". It looks like Chinese takes a similar approach
         - Italian does not translate the keys: "Tastiera: PgUp, PgDown, Ctrl+Arrows, Ctrl+Home, Ctrl+End,". Most languages take this approach.
         - Best to discuss among translation team for specific language if possible, to decide best approach. General guidance: don't translate unless these terms are commonly translated on the keyboard,  commonly used in other technical documentation, or are simply a translation of the English word into the language script. (The latter advice because if people are choosing to see R messages in a non-English language, they may prefer to see everything in that script where possible).
     - Suggested each team maintains a page on this wiki https://github.com/r-devel/translations where they note agreed conventions for future contributors/translators.
 - We explored Weblate a bit more for people that are new to it
     - How to find the translations for different languages (https://translate.rx.studio/projects/r-project/#languages)
     - How to register for an account (https://translate.rx.studio/accounts/register/)
 - Nozim is interested in starting an Uzbek translation. This would be similar to the Russian translation, so would not take so much work.
     - Advised to work on Russian translation to begin with, to gain experience. New languages can be added, but it is good to have more than one person willing to contribute for sustainability - a full translation is a lot of work. Additions of languages with a large community of speakers (e.g. Urdu) are particularly welcome.
     - Nozim notes that Uzbek would be very similar to Russian, so not so much work.
 - Ivan has some translations passed on from Alexey Shipunov (now deceased) that need to be committed to R core. How to progress? 
     - Suggested to contact Michael Lawrence, the R Core member now responsible for translations. If he is too busy, can try Mike Chirico or Gergely Daróczi from the R Contribution Working Group, who are active on the #core-translations channel of the Slack
 
###  Bugs       

Ella gave an overview of some related bugs that had been discussed on fosstodon.

-  https://fosstodon.org/@nibsalot/110105034507818285. From the thread on fosstodon:
   > dat <- c(5,1,3,0)  
   > sum(dat,  na.rm = TRUE) 
   > = 9 
   > sum(dat,  rm.na = TRUE) 
   > =10 
   > 
   > This looks like a normal sum operation where anything that is not one of the allowed named arguments is silently swallowed by ...  The logical is converted to 1L and added to whatever it also has. Perhaps a more interestingly case:
sum(NA, na.rm = TRUE, na.rm = FALSE). R doesn't warn or anything for duplicated valid named arguments and only uses the latest.  
   > --- @nibsalot@fosstodon.org
   - Ivan: If we decide this is a bug, it probably exists in all functions serviced by do_summary() except mean(), i.e. sum(), min(), max(), prod(). SEXP fixup_NaRm(SEXP args) may need adjusting.
   - Ayush:
     ```
     > min(dat,  rm.na = TRUE)
     [1] 0
     > min(dat,  na.rm = TRUE)
     [1] 0
     > max(dat,  na.rm = TRUE)
     [1] 5
     > max(dat,  rm.na = TRUE)
     [1] 5
     ```
    - Ivan: For example, max(0, rm.na = TRUE) gives 1. The question is, have users been naming max(...) / sum(...) arguments for their own purposes, or can non-"na.rm" named arguments to this function be upgraded to errors or at least warnings? prod() is almost safe because whatever=TRUE gets interpreted as 1.
    - Hugo: But then:
      ```
      > prod(10, rm.na = FALSE)
      [1] 0
      ```
    - Ivan: [Post-edit: Proposed fix to C function `fixup_NaRm`, called by `do_summary` and `do_range` in summary.c (https://github.com/r-devel/r-svn/blob/5a1df66419430180783a3cbaf74eedfc153ecc6d/src/main/summary.c#L410)]
      ```
      > sum(rm.na = TRUE)
      [1] 1
      Warning:
      Named argument "rm.na" here is probably an error
      ```
      
      ```
      --- src/main/summary.c  (revision 84252)
      +++ src/main/summary.c  (working copy)
      @@ -419,6 +419,8 @@
                  na_value = CAR(a);
                  if(prev == R_NilValue) args = CDR(a);
                  else SETCDR(prev, CDR(a));
      +       } else if (TAG(a) && TAG(a) != R_NilValue) {
      +           warning("Named argument \"%s\" here is probably an error", CHAR(PRINTNAME(TAG(a))));
              }
              prev = a;
           }
      ```
    - Ivan: The important part will be to decide on the right behaviour when such a named argument is found.
- https://fosstodon.org/@nibsalot/110042330075104480
  > "Question. Why doesn't  subset(mtcars, cyl = 4) error because of single =. While mtcars[mtcars$cyl = 4, ] does with Error: unexpected '=' in "mtcars[mtcars$cyl ="
  >  --- @nibsalot@fosstodon.org
    
  > "subset() should fail, yeah. cyl=4 is a named parameter in dots and dots isn’t used."
  > --- @anthonynorth@fosstodon.org
    
  Later in the thread, @nibsalot@fosstodon.org notes this behaviour will now generate a warning. We took a look at the fix: https://github.com/r-devel/r-svn/commit/df068c754f831529a9e229572df3f3f110127a30. This inserts a call to `chkDots()` at the beginning of subset.data.frame()
  - Does this fix both issues? We would need to create some test cases to check.

### Tests in R

- Ella: How does R do tests? Does it use testthat?
- Heather: we can look at the tests on the GitHub mirror: there are a set of files name reg-tests-1a, reg-tests-1b, ... e.g. https://github.com/r-devel/r-svn/blob/master/tests/reg-tests-1a.R. The latest one (updated a few minutes ago!) appears to be https://github.com/r-devel/r-svn/blob/master/tests/reg-tests-3.R. These are regression tests: each time a bug is fixed in R, an R core member will add some corresponding test code here. These tests are run whenever R is tested, to check the bug remains fixed (there is no regression making the bug reappear). We can see the latest change: https://github.com/r-devel/r-svn/commit/19508144a2d4a39f7b52dd6f48cecb607a700431. Alongside reg-tests-3.R, there is a file called reg-tests-3.Rout.save - this is the output we expect to see. When the tests are run, the output is compared to this reference and a message is produced if the output has changed. 
    - There are other test files, but the regression tests are the only ones that contributors are likely to contribute to, by submitting test code on Bugzilla.
    - Another advantage of the GitHub mirror, is that contributors can make a dummy pull request to the R sources, which triggers a run of the tests on different operating systems, take a look at an open PR here to see: https://github.com/r-devel/r-svn/pulls
    
### Bugzilla

- Heather: Did either of the bugs Ella mentioned ever get reported on Bugzilla?
- Ella went to Bugzilla and did a simple search of "data.frame" - we didn't see it there, but that only looks at open bugs. So she went to https://bugs.r-project.org/query.cgi?format=specific and changed status to All to also look at closed bugs - still nothing there. Since the second bug was fixed, there may have been a discussion on the R-devel mailing list.

### Wrap-up

- There may be many functions that should have their arguments checked by chkDots(). This could be a suitable project for the R Project Sprint.
     - [post-edit: chkDots is an R function, so this won't help with functions like sum that are primitive and go straight to the C code]
