[
    {
        "subtype": "bot_message",
        "text": "*[Bug 18975] 'provideDimnames' optionally providing names(dimnames(.))*\n<https:\/\/bugs.r-project.org\/show_bug.cgi?id=18975>\n\nMartin Maechler (<mailto:maechler@stat.math.ethz.ch|maechler@stat.math.ethz.ch>) changed:\n\n           What    |Removed                     |Added\n----------------------------------------------------------------------------\n             Status|UNCONFIRMED                 |CLOSED\n         Resolution|---                         |FIXED\n                 CC|                            |maechler@stat.math.ethz.ch\n\n--- Comment #3 from Martin Maechler (<mailto:maechler@stat.math.ethz.ch|maechler@stat.math.ethz.ch>) ---\nThank you, Mikael, comment #2 was a tiny bit too late.\nAll is now in R-devel svn r89293 (and newer).",
        "username": "r-bugs notifier",
        "icons": {
            "emoji": ":robot_face:"
        },
        "type": "message",
        "ts": "1767945747.770349",
        "bot_id": "B06769YJX9Q",
        "app_id": "A024R9PQM",
        "blocks": [
            {
                "type": "rich_text",
                "block_id": "mCM9G",
                "elements": [
                    {
                        "type": "rich_text_section",
                        "elements": [
                            {
                                "type": "text",
                                "text": "[Bug 18975] 'provideDimnames' optionally providing names(dimnames(.))",
                                "style": {
                                    "bold": true
                                }
                            },
                            {
                                "type": "text",
                                "text": "\n"
                            },
                            {
                                "type": "link",
                                "url": "https:\/\/bugs.r-project.org\/show_bug.cgi?id=18975"
                            },
                            {
                                "type": "text",
                                "text": "\n\nMartin Maechler ("
                            },
                            {
                                "type": "link",
                                "url": "mailto:maechler@stat.math.ethz.ch",
                                "text": "maechler@stat.math.ethz.ch",
                                "unsafe": true
                            },
                            {
                                "type": "text",
                                "text": ") changed:\n\n           What    |Removed                     |Added\n----------------------------------------------------------------------------\n             Status|UNCONFIRMED                 |CLOSED\n         Resolution|---                         |FIXED\n                 CC|                            |maechler@stat.math.ethz.ch\n\n--- Comment #3 from Martin Maechler ("
                            },
                            {
                                "type": "link",
                                "url": "mailto:maechler@stat.math.ethz.ch",
                                "text": "maechler@stat.math.ethz.ch",
                                "unsafe": true
                            },
                            {
                                "type": "text",
                                "text": ") ---\nThank you, Mikael, comment #2 was a tiny bit too late.\nAll is now in R-devel svn r89293 (and newer)."
                            }
                        ]
                    }
                ]
            }
        ]
    },
    {
        "subtype": "bot_message",
        "text": "*[Bug 18712] make `outer()` set dimname names [with patch]*\n<https:\/\/bugs.r-project.org\/show_bug.cgi?id=18712>\n\n--- Comment #6 from Thomas Soeiro (<mailto:Thomas.SOEIRO@ap-hm.fr|Thomas.SOEIRO@ap-hm.fr>) ---\nCreated attachment 3594\n  --&gt; <https:\/\/bugs.r-project.org\/attachment.cgi?id=3594&amp;action=edit>\ncode and documentation patch\n\nIn response to Mikael Jagan in comment 5:\n\nHere is a new proposal that tries to address your comments.\n\n&gt; (...) you might verify that no harm is done to packages that define S4 methods for an S4 generic outer.\n\nSorry for the dumb question, but could you point me to material showing how to\nidentify such methods\/packages?\n\n&gt; (...) Why should the existence of a names attribute determine whether deparsing happens?\n\nI'm not sure that setting dimnames names would be useful when there are no\ndimnames (but they are set anyway with the current proposal, as you suggest).",
        "username": "r-bugs notifier",
        "icons": {
            "emoji": ":robot_face:"
        },
        "type": "message",
        "ts": "1768008243.186319",
        "bot_id": "B06769YJX9Q",
        "app_id": "A024R9PQM",
        "blocks": [
            {
                "type": "rich_text",
                "block_id": "j=GB",
                "elements": [
                    {
                        "type": "rich_text_section",
                        "elements": [
                            {
                                "type": "text",
                                "text": "[Bug 18712] make ",
                                "style": {
                                    "bold": true
                                }
                            },
                            {
                                "type": "text",
                                "text": "outer()",
                                "style": {
                                    "bold": true,
                                    "code": true
                                }
                            },
                            {
                                "type": "text",
                                "text": " set dimname names [with patch]",
                                "style": {
                                    "bold": true
                                }
                            },
                            {
                                "type": "text",
                                "text": "\n"
                            },
                            {
                                "type": "link",
                                "url": "https:\/\/bugs.r-project.org\/show_bug.cgi?id=18712"
                            },
                            {
                                "type": "text",
                                "text": "\n\n--- Comment #6 from Thomas Soeiro ("
                            },
                            {
                                "type": "link",
                                "url": "mailto:Thomas.SOEIRO@ap-hm.fr",
                                "text": "Thomas.SOEIRO@ap-hm.fr",
                                "unsafe": true
                            },
                            {
                                "type": "text",
                                "text": ") ---\nCreated attachment 3594\n  --> "
                            },
                            {
                                "type": "link",
                                "url": "https:\/\/bugs.r-project.org\/attachment.cgi?id=3594&amp;action=edit",
                                "text": "https:\/\/bugs.r-project.org\/attachment.cgi?id=3594&action=edit"
                            },
                            {
                                "type": "text",
                                "text": "\ncode and documentation patch\n\nIn response to Mikael Jagan in comment 5:\n\nHere is a new proposal that tries to address your comments.\n\n"
                            }
                        ]
                    },
                    {
                        "type": "rich_text_quote",
                        "elements": [
                            {
                                "type": "text",
                                "text": "(...) you might verify that no harm is done to packages that define S4 methods for an S4 generic outer."
                            }
                        ],
                        "contains_padding": true
                    },
                    {
                        "type": "rich_text_section",
                        "elements": [
                            {
                                "type": "text",
                                "text": "\n\nSorry for the dumb question, but could you point me to material showing how to\nidentify such methods\/packages?\n\n"
                            }
                        ]
                    },
                    {
                        "type": "rich_text_quote",
                        "elements": [
                            {
                                "type": "text",
                                "text": "(...) Why should the existence of a names attribute determine whether deparsing happens?"
                            }
                        ],
                        "contains_padding": true
                    },
                    {
                        "type": "rich_text_section",
                        "elements": [
                            {
                                "type": "text",
                                "text": "\n\nI'm not sure that setting dimnames names would be useful when there are no\ndimnames (but they are set anyway with the current proposal, as you suggest)."
                            }
                        ]
                    }
                ]
            }
        ]
    }
]